In this video, we'll discuss
packet sniffing,
with a focus on how
threat actors may use
this technique to
gain unauthorized
access to information.
Previously, you learned about
the information and data packets
that travel across the network.
Packets include a
header which contains
the sender's and
receiver's IP addresses.
Packets also contain
a body, which
may contain valuable
information like names,
date of birth,
personal messages,
financial information, and
credit card numbers.
Packet sniffing is
the practice of using
software tools to observe
data as it moves
across a network.
As a security analyst,
you may use packet sniffing
to analyze and capture
packets when investigating
ongoing incidents
or debugging network issues.
Later in this
certificate program,
you'll gain hands-on practice
with some packet
sniffing software.
However, malicious
actors may also use
packet sniffing to look at
data that has not
been sent to them.
This is a little bit like
opening somebody else's mail.
It's important for you
to learn about how
threat actors use
packet sniffing
with harmful intent
so you can be
prepared to protect against
these malicious acts.
Malicious actors may insert
themselves in the middle of
an authorized connection
between two devices.
Then they can use packet
sniffing to spy on
every data packet as it
comes across their device.
The goal is to find
valuable information in
the data packets that they can
then use to their advantage.
Attackers can use
software applications
or a hardware device to
look into data packets.
Malicious actors can access
a network packet with
a packet sniffer and make
changes to the data.
They may change the information
in the body of the packet,
like altering a recipient's
bank account number.
Packet sniffing can
be passive or active.
Passive packet
sniffing is a type of
attack where data packets
are read in transit.
Since all the
traffic on a network
is visible to any
host on the hub,
malicious actors can view
all the information going
in and out of the device
they are targeting.
Thinking back to the example
of a letter being delivered,
we can compare a
passive packet sniffing
attack to a postal
delivery person
maliciously reading
somebody's mail.
The postal worker, or packet
sniffer, has the right
to deliver the mail,
but not the right to read
the information inside.
Active packet
sniffing is a type of
attack where data packets
are manipulated in transit.
This may include injecting
internet protocols to
redirect the packets to
an unintended port or
changing the information
the packet contains.
Active packet
sniffing attack would
be like a neighbor telling
the delivery person
"I'll deliver that mail for
you," and then reading the mail
or changing the letter before
putting it in your mailbox.
Even though your
neighbor knows you
and even if they deliver
it to the correct house,
they are actively going out of
their way to engage in
malicious behavior.
The good news is that
malicious packet sniffing
can be prevented.
Let's look at a few ways
the network security
professional
can prevent these attacks.
One way to protect against
malicious packet
sniffing is to use
a VPN to encrypt and protect
data as it travels
across the network.
If you don't remember
how VPNs work,
you can revisit the video about
this topic in the previous
section of the program.
When you use a VPN,
hackers might interfere
with your traffic,
but they won't be
able to decode it
to read it and read your
private information.
Another way to add a layer of
protection against packet
sniffing is to make sure
that websites you have use
HTTPS at the beginning
of the domain address.
Previously, we discussed
how HTTPS uses SSL/TLS to
encrypt data and
prevent eavesdropping
when malicious actors spy on
network transmissions.
One final way to help
protect yourself against
malicious packet sniffing is to
avoid using unprotected WiFi.
You usually find
unprotected WiFi in
public places like coffee shops,
restaurants, or airports.
These networks don't
use encryption.
This means that anyone on
the network can access
all of the data traveling
to and from your device.
One precaution you
can take is avoiding
free public WiFi
unless you have
a VPN service already
installed on your device.
Now you know how
threat actors may use
packet sniffing and how to
protect a network
from these attacks.
Let's move on to discuss
other network intrusions.